Advanced Statistical Modeling for Walmart Sales Forecasting

Project Overview:- 
This project focuses on building a robust retail sales forecasting system using historical Walmart data. By moving from a traditional baseline regression model to a Random Forest approach and implementing a SARIMAX time-series model, the project achieved a 15% improvement in prediction accuracy (MAPE). The final results are visualized in an interactive Tableau dashboard to enable data-driven inventory management decisions.


Tech Stack:- 
Language: Python 3.x
Libraries: Pandas, NumPy, Scikit-Learn, Statsmodels (SARIMAX)
Data Format: Parquet (for optimized storage and performance)
Visualization: Tableau Desktop
Environment: VS Code

Key Features & Logic:- 
Following specific data science workflows, the project follows these exact steps:

1. Data Engineering & Cleaning

Optimized Loading: Converted raw CSV data into Parquet format to reduce memory usage and increase processing speed.

Date Parsing: Systematic parsing of date strings into datetime objects to ensure chronological alignment.

Integrity Checks: Performed rigorous checks for missing values, duplicate entries, and null/negative sales data.

Imputation: Utilized the forward-fill (ffill) method in Pandas to handle gaps in transactional data.

Promotion Handling: Converted empty promotion/markdown values to 0 to ensure numerical consistency for the models.

2. Feature Engineering

Calendar Features: Introduced specialized time-based variables including:

Day of the Week

Month of the Year

Holiday Flags (0/1) to capture seasonal spikes.

3. Statistical Modeling

Baseline Model: Implemented Multiple Linear Regression as a performance benchmark.

Improved Model: Optimized a Random Forest Regressor, which successfully reduced the MAPE (Mean Absolute Percentage Error) from 20% down to 15%.

Time Series Analysis: Leveraged SARIMAX over Prophet because it allows for the inclusion of external factors (exogenous variables) like Temperature, Fuel Price, and CPI alongside trends and seasonality.

Validation: The model was trained on 4 months of data to predict the next 4 weeks, simulating real-world retail planning cycles.

Tableau Dashboard Structure

The results were exported into a 3-page interactive Tableau report focused on operational insights:

Sales by Store: A geographic/bar breakdown of performance across different locations.

Overall Trends: A time-series analysis highlighting the impact of holidays on sales volume.

Inventory Sold by Month: A view designed for supply chain teams to visualize monthly throughput and predict future inventory needs.

Project Structure
code
Text
download
content_copy
expand_less
Walmart_Sales_Forecasting/
├── data/
│   ├── Walmart_Store_sales.csv      # Raw Data
│   └── walmart_data.parquet         # Compressed Data
├── src/
│   ├── cleaning.py                  # Data Prep Script
│   └── modeling.py                  # ML & Time Series Script
├── output/
│   └── walmart_cleaned_final.csv    # Final export for Tableau
└── README.md
How to Run

Clone the repository.

Install dependencies:

code
Bash
download
content_copy
expand_less
pip install pandas scikit-learn statsmodels pyarrow

Run the pipeline:

Execute python src/cleaning.py to process raw data.

Execute python src/modeling.py to generate forecasts and the Tableau export.

Open Tableau: Connect to the file in the output/ folder to view the dashboards.

Results Summary
Model	MAPE (Error)
Linear Regression (Baseline)	20.0%
Random Forest (Final)	15.0%
Accuracy improved by 25% relative to the baseline.	 